[Question](https://nixpkgs.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/438035-Assembly-Q.26A/topic/On.20Scope/near/439613236): There's been a lot of discussion about moderation (which I think is understandable) but when folks start to discuss moderation and governance as identical, I get concerned. My understanding of Open Source Governance includes things like project management - overall architecture and vision, down to how individual component projects operate, and how those project teams interact and coordinate. (To be clear: governance might not specify a particular way of working, only that sub-projects (e.g. the Nix CLI tool) have a well defined way of working with certain requirements). While moderation is a critical part of that, it's not necessarily the be all and end all.

With that context, what scope does the assembly contemplate for governance?

It might be useful to mention challenges in the Nix ecosystem that governance should countenance or that are explicitly out of scope, acknowledging that the assembly doesn't intent to resolve those issues as part of their remit (or that they do.) For instance, flakes vs classic Nix might be an enlightening example.    

### Answer

Although moderation is an important part of governance, it is only a single component of broader project governance. We see our scope as defining the overall structures and policy for governance, but don’t intend on making technical decisions (e.g. on flakes) on behalf of the future body.

In the other dimension, which spaces and processes are covered by the scope definitely needs to include Nixpkgs development, the Nix trademark efforts, and probably some other projects and needs — but the details need to be considered carefully.

That is a very broad scope, that includes teams and initial charters, and a basic set of policies to guide the way those teams function and how they work together — while trying to minimise disruption by doing the changes that are needed and not a ground-up redesign.
