# Assembly public call notes

Assembly attendees: @infinisil @7c6f434c @lassulus @ryantrinkle @edef @Danielle @SarahNovotny
Board attendees: @ronef @thufschmitt
Other attendees: @nat-218 @hexa @olaf @JulienMalka @nyanbinary @fricklerhandwerk +9 others
Notes by: @infinisil

Agenda:
- @danielle Intro meeting
- @sarah background and statement
  - hi, who i am [as the external non nix community person]
  - governance processes [examples from k8s node/jsf -> openjs]
        scope of "community"
        goal of assembly develop framework for governance and processes to refine this cuz it won't be perfect
        
  - ask for grace. 
      - you are all leaders and constituents.
  - ask for concerns to be framed as both meta concern and concrete examples [avoiding both hyperbole and finger pointing]
  - state of moderation as a single context of governance and not changing substantially today 
- Open floor to questions
  - Real-time thus to members not to the assembly

## Notes

- @danielle: Goal today is to give context, open-floor Q&A. Answers won't necessarily be unified yet, we just started.
- @Sarah: New here, introducing myself!
  - Participating in a lot of community governance work in the past 10 years: kubernetes, node.js foundation. Doesn't mean it has to work the same way here.
  - Define the community, make something work for it, then refine it over time.
  - Regarding moderation, for now no changes, we will iterate on it. Moderation is just a single (hopefully small) component of the governance. You all have behave as constructive leaders in the community.
  - Not a political space, but a space to build software. From what I can see, velocity has dropped in last weeks/months, goal to bring it back up to speed, bring people back to technical discussions.
- Open for questions!
- @fricklerhandwerk: Is there any outline of the assembly's plan for the coming weeks/months? Board provided a general direction, are there any more concrete ideas already?
  - @SarahNovotny: That will be our next step, at the moment we've had barely any meetings, and so far mostly discussed the current community churn. Give us some time and grace.
  - @infinisil: Just before this meeting we had a meeting to align ourselves on procedures for Q&A. We will set up some procedures internally soon to decide on the next steps
  - @Sarah: Have discussed the scope a bit. Technology places, social places to propose governance for. Finding alignment in groups, scope spaces, figure out what is out-of-scope. E.g. "What is the role of the governing board?", "Where does the moderation team fit in?". Haven't reached any clean answer, just rought thougths for now.
  - @Danielle: We need to get a lot of input from the community, then spend time to distill that into what works, takes time
- @nat-418: What's the most useful thing that the community can do to help the assembly?
  - @Michael: What's the solution space to explore? Get new types of arguments on that, instead of going into too much detail on the existing arguments. We haven't aligned as the assembly yet, so questions can't be answered immediately
  - @ryantrinkle: Want to hear everybody's concerns. Have been trying to read as much as possible, a lot of concerns to understand before figuring out how to proceed.
  - @ronef: Viewing people involved as leaders is great, as the initial concerns, timeline, priorisation, etc. are figured out. I'd wish for everyone to put on a leadership mindset and see how we can move progress instead of piling up more problems (not that logging problems is wrong per se).
  - @ronef: Wouldn't want to optimise for the perfect governance from the start. Try to move back to Nix itself. Find it more important to make progress towards better governance and not wait until or optimize for perfection from the start.
  - @Sarah: Help deescalate situations in the community when you see an opportunity. Figure out values and problems instead of engaging in conflicts. Everyone's a leader by showing up.
  - @infinisil: We have a lot of input to take already (over 5000 Zulip messages!), maybe chill a bit more, let us catch up, we'll ask for more input when needed
- @mathnerd314159265: (not really a question) Look for the root causes of the disagreements, not the symptoms
  - @Sarah: There's definitel a set of systemic problems that need to be addressed, which are hard to find in all the smoke.
  - @Michael: Agreeing, a lot of things are indeed recurring. We made mistakes many years back, and we surely won't do things perfectly now. But good enough has better chances. I take it as my responsibility to think about things that happen again and again
  - @ryantrinkle: Have experience with the Haskell foundation. Would like to see Nix work better as a community, make technical decisions as necessary, sometimes quickly. I would like to figure out how to  to reach general community consensus going forward and not leave people behind.
  - @Danielle: We can't always get consensus, but should be able to remediate the non-consensus effectively.
- @Sarah: (interlude) Thanks for joining! This seaks highly of your investment and support. Back with Kubernetes we were building decentralised software system and deemed that we needed a decentralised governance platform. The pieces that have to work together need clear boundaries. Pieces that don't work together should be able to work individually.
  - @fricklerhandwerk: Interesting take. One value that may unify the community is what I'd call disciplined software development.
- @fricklerhandwerk: One thing that was straining in past years is that substantial efforts didn't get the attention needed to get them merged. I observe an imbalance between people wanting and able to make contributions and people being able to accept those contributions. My hope is that the governance structure can help alleviate this.
  - @Michael: Have seen observed RFC 25 and RFC 36 in real time, which was decision-makin about large changes. Some contributions are easy to review (non-controversial, but may pose a throughput problem), some are more controversial that are hard to be accepted. My position is that often it's good if things get stuck, because that also results in stability, i.e. avoids churn. We need ot align expectations about what decisions can be made with the reality of the decisions that *can* be made. Some work is hard and slow, and we should try to remove the accidental complexity of decisions, but we can't remove the inherent complexity.
  - @ryantrinkle: Need to take into account groups of people working on the project, where it should be tighter together. Build more delegation into the governance structure, people should be able to make decisions independently and decisively, without causing conflicts.
- @Julien: Do assembly members want to mend the rift in ideologies in the community?
  - @infinisil: Definitely interested in that myself, the tricky question is how. We don't have an anwser yet
  - @JulienMalka: Does anybody have personal experience with resolving this?
  - @Sarah: Building the governance itself can help mend the rift. Making the boundaries clear, defining acceptable behaviours, what is encouraged/discouraged, among peers, not top-down from e.g. the moderators. This also requires building trust. I personally lean heavily towards shared values, Michael isn't in agreement, but I truly believe that we can find shared values. These may be doing good technical work, something that is rewarding to work on together in the community, being thankful to people for doing work. A distilled value in Kubernetes: "The community is more important than your company". We decided that the community being cohesive is more important than some company getting their feature in.
  - @Michael: Sometimes we need to step back and face reality. We have a project (main one Nixpkgs because it's the most expensive one in terms of work and infrastructure) with certain technical values, we arguably want it to exist and be updated. Therefore we probably want to work together on this, as splitting it would be needlessly expensive. Having a single community may be a bit too optimistic, and I'd strictly avoid speaking about a single community. There are already various communities with different interestes and social norms, we should recognise this. We may have a single technical project but multiple social communities that can agree to collaborate, and wouldn't be the worst outcome, maybe even a good one. People could find a comfortable place for them, with a respectful common ground. The technical common ground may become a bit more sterile as a result, but that's not necessarily bad.
  - @infinisil: Will have to be discussed, not aligned yet, great that we have different opinions. Will have to get input from the community as well.
  - @ronef: Great example of what might work in the next 5 years, but might need further changes later.
- @JudsonLester: IMO some recent conflicts have been about representation. There are groups that want to define a certain number of seats for e.g. minorities, others who think picking the best from each group will lead to a good representation. How to satisfy both groups?
  - @Danielle: We don't have internal alignment yet, no answer yet. This has been answered for other communities, but not for Nix yet.
  - @Michael: A lot of problems stem from not knowing which decision represents whom, and for whom the decision is made. Even if we have multiple communities but don't make the decisions clearly about one or another, that's a problem. From the participation critera on Zulip we can assume the constitutional assembly to decide on behalf of the contributor community in the widest sense.
- @ronef: Assembly not being aligned is not a bug, but a feature, there are multiple opinions that will be shared and worked with. Better for being able to find a good place to land at.
  - @Michael: If we have consensus on day 1, the assembly would be worthless. If we are close to consensus on day 50 we'd at least show that we've done work.
  - @Danielle: If we had consensus already, that would only show we haven't listened to the community at all.
- @nyanbinary: How can the assembly guarantee the new governance structure isn't systematically oppressive?
  - @Sarah: We cannot guarantee anything, especially since by definition it's hard to find allies for underrepresented minorities. But if the assembly is doing its work well, we'll encourage people to build the muscle to discuss these issues sincerley and create opportunities for people to shape these structures appropriately.
- @Sarah: Thanks to everybody again, you hold us accountable to what we're doing :)
  - @fricklerhandwerk: Thanks for taking on the responsibility
  - @Sarah: I think anybody from the assembly is happy to take private messages. I'll also do a series of interviews. Let me know if you have recommendations for people to talk to.
  - @Danielle: Most of us are planning to do our own interviews.
  - @infinisil: Want to get input from as many people as possible, randomly picking contributors is a great way for that, also contributors that aren't active anymore
- Next Q&A?
  - Not sure yet, maybe every week, maybe one more this month
